# June 02, 2017 (Friday)

## Towards a fully populated tree of life using DNA sequencing
### Mads Albertsen

* Purpose here is to more completely populate the tree of life and capture greater diversity in microbial communities.
* Schloss 2016 study to evaluate how well we are populating the archaea and bacterial tree of life.
	- Not optimistic because we are not leveling out in finding new organisms (rarefaction).
	- 29% of bacterial OTUs and 39% of archaea OTUs have been observed only once.
* We need new methods for creating a better tree of life.
	- Better methods with reduced error rate.
	- Longer reads.
	- Higher throughput.
	- Primer free to more freely capture diversity.
	- Prevent chimeras.
* Three steps to obtain primer free data.
	1. Generate full length cDNA from RNA and attach unique tags (RNA processing)
	2. Create the library and sequence the cDNA molecules (use the Nextera library prep kit)
	3. Data processing. Denovo assembly and annotation.
* The project was applied to environmental soil samples to demonstrate how it works. Validate throughput, etc.
* Using this approach in a variety of samples, they were able to more completely sample the possible OTUs. The rarefaction curves start to level off.
* Clustering was done using a 97% clustering for OTUs.
* Also looked at sequencing depth in Archaea. Saw a lot of diversity that was not captured as completely as for bacteria (in aquatic samples).
* Many of the OTUs were novel, when compared to Silva.
* Still have not reached eukaryotic diversity -- future direction.
* My own thought is that this approach could benefit from Nanopore or related sequencing (even Pacbio) to get longer reads and cut down on assembly.
* They actually are using nanopore for metagenomics and assembling whole bacterial genomes.
* Integrating ribosomal sequences on the minION.

## Large scale prediction of microbial roles and traits (whole genome sequencing)
### Thomas Rattei

* There are many different and exciting techniques for metagenomic and other techniques. Some use machine learning approaches. Brief overview.
* Approaches for mining whole genomes from any group of organisms.
	- Machine learning for phenotype prediction.
	- Some software tools to look at in this area.
		1. PICA: Using protein family occurrence to predict microbial roles, metabolic trains, resistance, etc.
		2. Traitar: Protein domain (Pfam) occurrence for predict phenotypes from global infectious disease and epidemiology network.
		3. PaPrBag: Using genome/protein sequence-based features to identify pathogens.
	- We need to think about how we collect the data to train the models.
		+ Information from experts.
		+ Information from literature.
		+ Presence of key genes from existing datasets.
* This talk is largely aimed at introducing the audience to some machine learning concepts.
* Dealing with incomplete genome drafts.
	- Testing the performance of the PICA tool against "mock" incomplete drafts of S. aureus model.
	- Also need to model how to deal with contaminated genome draft genomes. Again benchmarking PICA.
	- Features can be pulled from PICA for importance in the model (trying to shed light on the "black box")
* Call for collaboration in role and trait prediction in microbial communities, and even novel microbes. Worked in Tara ocean project.

## Targeted single-cell genomics
### Tanja Woyke

* Research from the JGI
* We have observed a large spike in the amount of single cell sequencing data.
* Use of single cell genomics to link phages to their hosts (super cool) and symbionts to their hosts.
* Performing function-driven targeted single-cell genomics.
* Using a fluorescent labeled substrate approach to target bacterial cells that are processing certain metabolites. This is pretty cool!
* Performed some cool benchmarking to validate their enrichment technique. Again, super cool and allowed them to move to the field.
* The enrichment can then be used for further sorting for single cell genome sequencing, although not absolutely true that they are "single cells".
* Their sorting is based on cellulose-based sorting.
* Important technical note that these must be processed fresh.
* This approach also works with secondary metabolites.

## Why does drug resistance readily evolve but vaccine resistance does not?
### Andrew Read
* With drugs like malaria, resistance emerges very quickly. Smallpox however did not evolve resistance to our vaccine and instead became eradicated.
* Vaccines are used prophylactically while drugs are used after the fast. That means vaccines see much smaller populations, and therefore reduced chance of seeing resistant organisms. In other words, the timing of action is important in evolution.
* Vaccines have many epitope targets when drug are essentially single pathways. Therefore vaccines are more difficult to evolve against.
* The timing of action and multiplicity of targets are two key factors that have been validated experimentally as impacting evolution of resistance.
* Measles and polio rapidly evolve against monoclonal antibodies, but sera cannot be effectively evolved against.
* Vaccine resistance has evolved, and usually because these two factors are violated. They were either single target vaccines or incomplete prophylaxis.
* Cocktails of entities are required for sustainable vaccine efficacy.
* What does vaccine resistance look like?
	- Vaccine are not special, in that they are fully capable of failing against pathogen evolution.
	- Difference here is that vaccines do not see diversity like drug generally do.
	- Usually vaccine resistance is seen as "escape variants" where the pathogen escapes the vaccine derived immunity. It is also possible though that you get more virulent strains under vaccine pressure.
	- When a pathogen becomes too virulent in an un-vaccinated population, it can kill the host and fail to reproduce. Under vaccines, they may be able to survive due to greater immunity, and populate in vaccinated populations. This can be especially devastating for un-vaccinated individuals.
	- There is interesting evidence in the literature that this does in fact occur. A lot of these studies are *in silico* however.
	- This was primarily done around Marek's disease and chicken farming.

## Inherently Probabilistic Invasion Dynamics of the Gut Microbiota
### W. B. Ludington

* "Colonization of the gut is like winning the lottery."
* Model system here is the fruit fly. It is a low diversity community for studying.
* Experiment is feeding defined bacterial communities to the flies, and then transferring them to sterile food containers so that no more bacteria colonize.
	- First intuitive finding was that greater bacterial dose correlates with higher chance of colonization.
	- Need to feed three times more human isolate to flies to match defined colony colonization probability.
* Prior colonization of bacteria decreases ability of new community to colonize. This makes sense and agrees with what we already know.
* I think where he is going with this is looking at individual bacteria abilities to colonize new systems.

## Experimental evolution of diversity
### Rees Kassen

* Trying to do microbiome research beyond describing that a lot of stuff is there. Does this using experimental evolution.
* The ecology of antibiotic delivery and diversification.
* Growth rate correlated with MIC associated with antibiotic growth of the Pseudomonas culture.
* Levene. 1953. Am Nat. Paper for model of coexistence supported by negative frequency dependent selection.
* Coexistence of bacterial populations are underlain by a trade-off between resistance and growth rate in the absence of the drug.
* The point of this is working toward strategies where we can slow resistance.
* Now we are changing gears to diversification of pseudomonas in the cystic fibrosis.
	- One problem with CF is the inability to clear their lungs of mucous. This mucous reduces dispersal of the bacterial communities.
	- The experimental setup was a defined medium with and without mucin and colonized by pseudomonas.
	- Patho-associated phenotypes were associated with the addition of mucin. Musin was associated with increased virulence factors (e.g. swim motility, twitch motility, etc). Even in vitro, we see changes similar to what we see in the lung.
	- The resulting colonies also had different colony morphology.
	- Nutritional complexity, not mucin, was driving diversification and both were associated with dispersal.

## Dissecting Synergistic Biofilm Formation and Community Biofilm Robustness Using a Model Drinking Water Bacterial Community
### M. J. Wargo

* Today talking about community robustness.
* Removing any individual member from a biofilm community does not affect the biofilm itself.
* When a bacterium is removed, other bacteria fill the niche. Makes sense, but cool to show.
* Biofilm formation seemed to be due to synergistic relationships between specific pairs of bacteria.
* Tried to titrate out how many cells were needed for synergistic creation of biofilms. Different bacteria titrate at different levels.
* Using phages to perturb biofilm communities.

## The Evolutionary Ecology of Metabolic Interactions in Structured Environments
### William Harcombe

* Linking genotypes to ecosystems, and looking at how location mediated interactions between microbes.
* Flux balance analysis predicts optimal physiology of bacteria from metabolites and reactions.
* It can use available nutrients and metabolic networks in a bacterium to predict biomass, byproducts, etc.
* Program COMETS was used for flux balance analysis. This seems like a cool tool for metabolic modeling.
* This analysis allows for accurate prediction of species interactions. This is so cool! You can also include mutations in the analysis since it uses genome sequences.
* http://www.bu.edu/segrelab/comets/
* The group moved on to incorporating spacial locations into the models. Worked with 2D models like plates.
* Question was how much variation and growth can be explained by the models.
* The observation of colonies growing on a plate was that there was great variance in how much they grow across the plate.
* They used the location and size information of individual to train model to predict how large a colony would be on a plate.
* Use this model to determine which competitors drive variation in colony size. Graphs were used to explain what drove the observed variance.
* Overall a solid example of how we can use math models to provide new basic biological understanding.
* Variation of growth is more about the arrangment of cells and not so much the proximity of competing cells.

## Experimental Coevolution of Enterococcus with a Lytic Phage
### S. Wandro

* Looking at antagoniztic co-evolution between phages and bacteria.
* Used shotgun sequencing to investigate the genomic basis for increased phage infectivity and bacterial resistance.
* Bacterial mutations in capsule synthesis genes confer increased phage resistance.
* Phage was evolving infectivity using a single point mutation in the phage capsid, as well as deletions in genes in hypothetical proteins.
* Observed tandem duplications in the tail fiber gene of the phage.
* Suggests implications for phage therapy?


