## Global Action Plan Against Antibiotic Resistance
### Teresa Coque

* ~3,000 pharma drugs in use today, which have important impacts on the environment.
* We don't know the effects of drugs on the environment, especially on microbial communities.
* Factors that impact antibiotic effects on environment include concentration, exposure time, substrates, number of antibiotics in cocktail.
* Microbial communities that share transposase also share habitats.

## A novel leucyl-tRNA synthetase inhibitor for gram negative bacteria
### N Masuda

* Their drug was able to effectively treat murine UTI from various gram negative bacteria.
* Very effective against MDR pathogens compared to current therapeutic agents.
* The group further confirmed activity of their drug in larger animal models, before preparing for human trials.
* Overall their drug showed less resistance development than other drugs, in their studies.

## Patterns of Thaumarchaeal Gene Content and Expression in the Ocean
### Alyson Santoro

* Got it part way through this session. Bummer.
* They have been developing enrichment cultures for years, allowing them to study different communities in different marine environments.
* 16S and amoA genes are 100% similar between different archaea. These genes are not enough to observe all diversity.
* Used transcriptome to figure out ammonia processing pathway in their archaea.
* They took 68 (parsed down to 10) transcriptomes and made co-abundance networks to find modules of core machinery.
* Also looking at core proteome, but still have not found the core enzyme that is performing the oxidation processes that they are interesting.
* They moved on from a co-abundance network across the transcriptome, to genes expressed with negative correlations between each other between studies.
* Found that urea transporters and not urease were highly transcribed in their environment.

## Motility in Archaea
### Sonja-Verena Albers

* Showing video of archaea that change direction of swimming when exposed to different light. From 1991.
* They are working with an archaea model organism from hot springs. Very well developed with genetic tools. Overall good model system.
* Using microscopy to observe rotating archaea motion and quantify impact of experimental conditions.
* Focusing on flagellum motor complex.
	- FlaH interaction with FlaI is ATP dependent
	- Cyanobacteria have a circadian clock protein (really cool!) that take 12 hours to phosphorylate and 12 hours to de-phos. This was similar to the flagella motor complex protein.
	- Archaea motor complex protein has similarity to circadian clock protein from Cyanobacteria.

## Reaching the parts other methods Can't: Long reads for microbial genomics and metagenomics
### Nicholas Loman

* Got in to this session late as well.
* Assemble an E. coli genome in 8 reads. Trying to get longer reads.
	- They used PFGE to find that they are not able to get a single genome read because they genome is fragmented.
	- Currently working on methods to get isolated genome without fragments.
	- They key here is really in the library prep at this point.

## Read Error Correctin of Oxford Nanopore Reads Using Molecular Tagging
### Rasmus Kirkagaard

* Using RNA to test quality of sequences.
* The error correction with consensus reads seems to work, but it is still a work in progress.
* It works for amplicons, and genes and operons of any length.

## Resolving the complexity of human skin metagenomes using single-molecule sequencing
### Julia Oh

* Talking about PacBio today.
* Introduction. Culturing biases the taxonomic diversity of the skin. 
* There remains uncharacterized biodiversity in the skin (and other microbiome communities).
* The problem with skin metagenomics is that genes/genomes are short contigs and incompletely assembled genomes. So what insights can we get from long reads?
* Used Illumina with PacBio.
* SMRT sequencing captured some rare microbes, including archaea and viruses.
* HGAP (PacBio) assembler produced 4 long contigs that could be closed into a single genome.
* When comparing the assembled genome to a reference genome (type strain), the assembly actually looked like a real genome. Validation of the technique.
* In the end, PacBio offered large improvement in annotation of the skin metagenome. Resolving the "dark matter".
* Long read sequencing is great for resolving genomes but is limited by complexity and depth of the samples.
* Used the PacBio system to detect areas of DNA modification within the genome. Suggests this might be good for determining why microbes function differently.

## Population structure analysis of mycoplasma pneumoniae using whole metagneomic sequencing
### Maureen Diaz

* Outbreaks of this pathogen occurs every 3-7 year cycle.
* Two datasets, first was 107 genomes and the other was 34 isolate genomes. It looks like the 34 genomes were the only ones actually closed?
* The 107 isolate set split very clearly into two phylogenetic groups. Type 1 and 2 isolates.
* The long reads allowed them to get accurate closed genomes from their isolates, which let them compare the genomic diversity within the pathogenic bacteria.
* Cool demonstration of what can be done with long read sequencing.
