## Insights into gut microbiota function using single cell isotope probing
### David Berry

* Comparing approach to ecology in a coral reef. Observing the interactions between organisms. How do we do that in a complex microbiome?
* Arguing for a single-cell ecophysiology research.
* Looking at mucus layer which mediates symbiont-host interactions.
* NanoSIMS technique allows for mass spectrometry for identifying isotopes in bacteria within microbiome.
* Using this technique, able to look at which bacteria are degrading host proteins.
* Moving on to look at host compound foraging and dysbiosis during total parenteral nutrition.
	- Are bacteria taking advantage of "leaked" amino acid nutrients in disease state.
	- Confirm that blooming enterobacteriaceae are foraging on host nutrients.
* Something I am thinking about is how this method would compare to the metabolite-targeted sequencing that we saw the day before yesterday?
* Using heavy water labeling to develop functional profiles of the microbiome.
* Using Raman sorting to pick out single cells that are labeling with metabolites and do sequencing on them.

## Microbial and molecular cartography of the human GI tract
### Laura Pace

* Starting with discussion of related Cell Host & Microbe paper.
* Then moving on to study design for the talk. Getting samples from endoscopy, and unable to get healthy controls (regulation stuff), so only observations from different disease states. Mucosal sampling.
* Descriptive work seeing different microbiomes in different GI regions. Microbiome varies by anatomical region. Unique here I think because it is mucosa, but this agrees with what we know in the field.
* Going into some microbiome descriptions about individual patients. Microbiome case studies.
* Moving on to metabolomics across the GI locations.
	- Metabolites were used in molecular networking. Clustering algorithm used to cluster molecules based on structural similarity.
	- Using this approach to ID unknown metabolites based on strucutral similarities to those that were ID'd. I think there is a lot of potential here.
	- Found the metabolome varies by antomical location.

## Phage therapy in diarrhea patients: insight from stool microbiome analysis
### Harald Brussow

* This is a phage therapy clinical trial in Europe. Translating the in vitro findings to the clinic.
* They used phage T4 and also tried isolating natural phages for cocktail, in collaboration with Russian phage therapy company (Microgen).
* The group looked for phages with broad host ranges that could be used in cocktails.
* Safety tests even in human cohorts showed that the phage cocktail was very safe. Was a pretty large study.
* Oral phage therapy showed up in the stool and did not change the gut microbiome composition or diversity.
* Their trail excluded people who had been treated recently with antibiotics. This was also a placebo controlled trial and phages were added over standard of care.
* Microbiome analysis after the trial showed that they should have probably been targeting Streptococci instead of E coli for their clinical cohort.
* The oral phage therapy cocktail was safe but not clinically effective. Seems to be due to low pathogen load which could not support phage population.
